General Instructions :

Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper contains 12 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper is divided into three sections	Section A, B, and C.
(iii) Section A	Questions no. 1 to 3 are of 2 marks each.
(iv) Section B	Questions no. 4 to 11 are of 3 marks each.
(v) Section C	Question no. 12 is a Case Study-Based Question of 5 marks.
(vi) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, internal choice has been provided is some of the questions. Attempt any one of the alternatives in such questions.
(vii) Use of log tables is permitted, if necessary, but use of calculator is not
permitted.
c = 3	108 m/s
h = 6.63	10 34 Js
e = 1.6	10 19 C
0 = 4	10 7 T m A 1
0 = 8.854	10 12 C2 N 1 m 2
1	= 9	109 N m2 C 2
4	0

Mass of electron (me) = 9.1	10 31 kg
Mass of neutron = 1.675	10 27 kg
Mass of proton = 1.673	10 27 kg
6.023	1023 per gram mole
Boltzmann constant = 1.38	10 23 JK 1

SECTION A
1. The V	I characteristics of a solar cell is shown in the figure.
(a) What do the points P and Q represent ?
(b) Give the circuit diagram for a solar cell.	2
2. Explain the formation of depletion region in a p-n junction.	2
3. (a)	(i)	
appro	-particle in Geiger-Marsden scattering experiment.
(ii) What	will	be	the		value	of	the		impact	parameter	for scattering angle (I)	= 0 and (II)	= 180 ?			2
OR
(b)	Photoelectric emission occurs when a surface is irradiated with the
radiation of frequency (i) v1, and (ii) v2. The maximum kinetic energy of the electrons emitted in the two cases are K and 2K respectively.
Obtain the expression for the threshold frequency for the surface.	2
SECTION B
4. (a)	Depict the variation of the potential energy of a pair of nucleons with the separation between them.
(b)	Imagine the fission of a 56	into two equal fragments of 28
nucleus. Is the fission energetically possible ? Justify your answer
by working out Q value of the process.	3

Given : m  56

= 55·93494 u, m  28

= 27·98191 u.

5. With  the  help  of  a  circuit  diagram,  explain  the  working  of  a p-n junction diode as a full-wave rectifier. Also draw its input and output
waveforms.	3
6. An equiconvex lens forms a two times enlarged real image when an object is kept 16 cm from it. The lens is cut into two identical plano-convex lenses. If the object is again kept 16 cm in front of one of these lenses,
then find the nature and position of the image formed.	3
7. A ray is incident on a prism of material of refractive index 2 at point M such that it grazes along NC after emerging from the prism, as shown in the figure.
Find :	3
(a) the critical angle for the prism.
(b) the angle of refraction at face AB.
8. (a)   (i)   Depict a plane electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis. Write the expressions for its oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
(ii)	Write three characteristics of electromagnetic waves.	3
OR
(b) Name the electromagnetic waves which are produced by the following :
(i) Radioactive decays of nucleus
(ii) Welding arcs
(iii) Hot bodies
Write one use each of these waves.	3

9. (a)	Draw a labelled ray diagram showing the formation of an image by an astronomical refracting telescope in normal adjustment. Hence,
obtain the expression for its magnifying power.	3
OR
(b)	is incident normally on
(i) Depict the intensity distribution in the pattern observed.
(ii) Obtain the expression for the first maximum from the central maximum.	3
10. Find the ratio of the de Broglie wavelengths associated with an alpha particle and a proton, if both
(a) have the same speeds,
(b) have the same kinetic energy,
(c) are accelerated through the same potential difference.	3
11. An electron is in the third excited state in a hydrogen atom. It undergoes transitions to the lower energy states.
(a) What is the maximum number of spectral lines that can be emitted ?
(b) Calculate the minimum wavelength of the spectral lines emitted.	3
SECTION C
12. The British physicist Thomas Young explained the interference of light using the principle of superposition of waves. He observed the interference pattern on the screen, in his experimental set-
double slit experiment. The two slits S1 and S2 were illuminated by light from a slit S. The interference pattern consists of dark and bright bands of
light. Such bands are called fringes. The distance between two consecutive bright and dark fringes is called fringe width.
(a) If the screen is moved closer to the plane of slits S1 and S2, then the fringe width :
(i) will decrease, but the intensity of bright fringe remains the same.
(ii) will increase, but the intensity of bright fringe decreases.
(iii) will decrease, but the intensity of bright fringe increases.
(iv) and the intensity both remain the same.

(b) What will happen to the pattern on the screen, when the two slits S1 and S2 are replaced by two independent but identical sources ?
(i) The intensity of pattern will increase
(ii) The intensity of pattern will decrease
(iii) The number of fringes will become double
(iv) No pattern will be observed on the screen

(c) Two sources of light are said to be coherent, when both emit light waves of :
(i) same amplitude and have a varying phase difference.
(ii) same wavelength and a constant phase difference.
(iii) different wavelengths and same intensity.
(iv) different wavelengths and a constant phase difference.

(d) The fringe width	 is . If the
whole set-up is immersed in a liquid of refractive index , then the new fringe width will be :
(i)	
(ii)

(iii) 
(iv) 	2
(e) The total path difference between two waves meeting at points

P1 and P2 on the screen are

3 	and 2	respectively. Then :


(i) bright fringes are formed at both points.
(ii) dark fringes are formed at both points.
(iii) a bright fringe is formed at P1 and a dark fringe is formed at P2.
(iv) a bright fringe is formed at P2 and a dark fringe is formed at
P1.	5 1=5




















